EXPLORATORY MULTIVERSE OF THE EXISTING DETERMINATIVE–PRONOUN MATRIX
Run design fixed before the first new result, 10 September 2026.

Purpose
Examine how the partition and coassignment of 138 forms depend on representation,
distance and clustering choices. This is an exploratory analysis workspace.

Inputs and earlier work
The public matrix has 155 binary features, 73 determinatives and 65 pronouns in
the historical CGEL classification. Its original y/n coding is converted
strictly to 1/0. No missing values are imputed. The inventory is held fixed,
including classifications questioned in later work.

The reciprocals project's matrix_clean.csv matches every public-matrix cell
after conversion. Its feature block file supplies the established four domains:
morphology 66, phonology 3, semantics 36, syntax 50. The first 50 morphological
columns encode word components. Copied block metadata and historical reciprocal
specifications are hashed in input-manifest.json.

The earlier reciprocals specification curve has 40 rows: four distance choices,
two classifier penalties and five block-inclusion choices. The two penalties
do not affect its geometric distance contrasts, leaving 20 distinct distance
specifications. It examines the two reciprocals. Its classifier predictions and
distance contrasts have different specification axes.

The old figure plots the mean contrast across the two reciprocals. For that
mean, only morphology omission produces negative values; the manuscript's
"only morphology" description of the plotted result is supported. Each_other
considered alone also has negative contrasts under IDF-weighted Jaccard in the
full and no-syntax representations and under some no-phonology specifications.
An initial inspection mistook those itemwise signs for a contradiction of the
plotted mean. The distinction is recorded here to prevent that error recurring.
The new pipeline doesn't execute or import the old Stan/classifier code.

New two-group specifications
Core feature sets: all 155; omit 50 word components; omit four explicit analysis
labels; omit both; omit morphology; omit phonology; omit semantics; omit syntax.
Separate diagnostic panels: morphology; morphology without components;
phonology; semantics; syntax; syntax without the four labels.

The four analysis labels are inherited from the existing audit:
  functions_as_fused_determiner_head
  functions_as_head_of_partitive_construction
  functions_as_subject_determiner
  May_coordinate_with_non_fused_determiners
Removing them doesn't make the remaining coding theory-independent.

Weights:
  equal_features: equal weight per included column;
  equal_domains: equal total weight per included domain;
  unique_profiles: columns with identical binary profiles share one unit;
  idf_presence: log(138 / number of presences), used only with Jaccard.
All weight vectors are normalized to sum to one. Unique-profile weighting
addresses exact duplication only, not general diagnostic dependence.

Distances:
  Hamming: weighted fraction of disagreements;
  square-root Hamming: square root of that fraction, proportional to Euclidean
    distance on appropriately scaled binary coordinates;
  Jaccard: weighted disagreements divided by the weighted union of presences.
Two all-zero rows have Jaccard distance zero. The IDF-Jaccard branch retains an
earlier reciprocal-analysis choice. Jaccard assumes that shared absences don't
contribute similarity; its scientific suitability is a substantive choice.

PAM and average linkage run on all distances. Energy k-groups runs only with
square-root Hamming, where its Euclidean interpretation is direct. Each energy
fit uses 100 starts (seeds 1–100, up to 100 iterations); the lowest within-cluster
objective wins, without reference labels entering selection. Starts are
optimization checks, not extra specifications. Ties within 1e-10 are recorded.
PAM uses the original deterministic BUILD/SWAP algorithm. Average linkage uses
R's hclust tie handling and the source row order.

Equivalent distance calculations within a feature set are recorded as aliases
and contribute only one specification. Single-domain diagnostics are kept out
of the core membership summaries. Coassignment and aligned membership counts
are reported separately by method because energy has a narrower distance menu.
These frequencies describe the chosen menu, not membership probabilities.

Reference agreement is computed after fitting by the better of the two label
orientations. Adjusted Rand index (ARI) is invariant to label names and adjusts
pair agreement for chance under its conventional reference model. An exact
orientation tie is excluded from aligned membership counts; it remains in
coassignment summaries.

Number of clusters
PAM and average linkage additionally run at k=2 through k=8, capped at the
number of distinct binary row profiles. Silhouette curves describe cohesion
and separation within each representation. Their maximum doesn't establish
the number of grammatical categories. Energy retains k=2 for this run.

Prediction of a withheld domain
For each domain, remove every column in that domain before clustering.
Also remove any training column whose binary profile equals a held-out column
or its complement. Fit two clusters from the remaining features, using the
same compatible weighting/distance/method choices as above.

For each target row and held-out feature, estimate a Bernoulli probability
from the other rows in its cluster, using Beta(1,1) smoothing. The numerator
is other-row presences plus 1; the denominator is other-row count plus 2.
Compare log loss and Brier score with an ungrouped leave-one-row-out prevalence
baseline and the historical CGEL partition scored in the same way.
Positive log-loss gains favour the learned partition.

Repeat the domain-transfer procedure after excluding the four analysis labels
from both training and targets. This is a separate coding panel, not a second
independent dataset. The held-out domain never selects the number of clusters,
weights, random start or method. All outcomes are reported, with per-feature
and per-form contributions.

This is transductive prediction within the same inventory: the target form's
available domains participate in clustering. It is not validation on new
lexemes, independent judgments or unseen grammatical features learned without
any information about their distribution. Exact duplicate/complement removal
doesn't eliminate more general dependencies between domains or related forms.

Limits and work requiring additional evidence
No hypothetical alternative judgments or family assignments are invented.
Independently justified recodings and a checked paradigm/compound-family map
would support further branches. Equal weight per observed form is retained.
The recovered 232-column working file remains in the historical audit; it
isn't silently substituted for the authenticated public 155-column matrix.
This inventory contains no common/proper-noun comparator sample and cannot
establish whether the two groups are coordinate primary categories or noun
subclasses. No population p-values or confidence intervals are computed.

Reproduction
Requires R packages cluster, energy and digest.
From this machine:
  R_LIBS_USER=/tmp/determinatives-Rlib Rscript analysis/multiverse/run_multiverse.R
Optional first argument: a separate output directory for replay.
Then (requires Python with NumPy):
  python3 analysis/multiverse/verify_and_summarize.py

Outputs include per-specification assignments, feature weights, method-specific
coassignment matrices, membership counts, k curves, optimization starts,
domain-transfer scores, matched comparisons that change one analytical choice,
and a direct control against the existing audit.
The input manifest and protected-file snapshot keep this run separate from
the prior analysis outputs and manuscripts.

Method documentation checked during setup
https://stat.ethz.ch/R-manual/R-devel/library/cluster/html/pam.html
https://stat.ethz.ch/R-manual/R-devel/library/cluster/html/silhouette.html
https://search.r-project.org/CRAN/refmans/energy/html/kgroups.html
https://search.r-project.org/CRAN/refmans/mclust/html/adjustedRandIndex.html
